Is buttwink good or bad? Today I'm going
to answer that question. Now, first I'm
going to explain what buttwink actually
is. Come over here and I'm going to show
you on Mr. Skeleton Man. Buttwink is
what happens at the bottom of the squat
when you get all the way down and the
pelvis
posteriorly rotates. So that's this way.
And that's associated with another
movement at the lumbar spine. So right
now with a neutral pelvis, you can see
that's a neutral lumbar spine. But then
when the posterior tilt occurs, the
lumbar spine goes into lumbar flexion
under load which is the barbell on your
back. Some people say it's a problem.
Some people say it's not. Well, let's
talk a little bit about that. Firstly,
talking about the scientists and the
physiootherapists that say it's not a
problem. The discussion is spines are
designed to move and bend and twist. And
I agree they are. But then you've got
the people that oppose that opinion and
they say if you bend and load and twist
the discs repeatedly, they are
nonadaptive tissue. So I'm not saying
whether which side is right or wrong.
I'm saying what the arguments are. So
some people say they do adapt and
therefore you should train it gradually
and strengthen that structure and
strengthen that movement and it doesn't
matter if you buttwink. So what?
Continue to get it stronger and you'll
be fine and you'll be better prepared
for life. But then the science community
that says all of the discs of the spine
are non-addaptive tissue because they
are avascular. There is very little
blood supply. So therefore in time after
a certain amount of repetitions of
flexion and rotation under load, it ends
up wearing away and becomes problematic.
Now I'm not for or against any of those.
I'm all about performance and I let the
rehab specialists look after that. But
I'm going to tell you from a rehab
standpoint, I work towards that not
happening because I believe that when
you posterly tilt in a squat, it is
considered a leakage of energy. So, I'm
going to teach you how to squat and
avoid buttwink. If you want to learn
about the rehab side of it, I can give
you a few references that you can learn
about in the link in my bio. Not in the
link in the bio, in the description.
I'll give you a few references so that
you can do your own research. But I'm
going to be talking about this purely
from a performance standpoint. And my
opinion on the matter is I work towards
it not happening because I believe that
it's stronger if it doesn't happen. If
it does happen from time to time and it
doesn't cause pain, I won't sit there
and stop you from doing your squats and
say you're a bad person or you're doing
the wrong thing and that needs to stop
immediately, but I will still always
work towards it not happening. Now,
today while I do my squats, I'm going to
be warming up. I'm going to be doing low
bar squats. But recently, my favorite
warm-up for that is stiletto squats
because I've injured my quadricep and I
want to put direct blood into the
quadricep. Let it work. So, you're just
going to watch me very, very quickly
warm up to I don't know about 200 kg for
a stiletto squat, one rep at a time, and
then I'm going to show you all the
techniques that I use to help you avoid
buttwink. Let's do it.
[Music]
Let's do Let's not die. And let's do two
reps.
[Music]
That's a really nice warm up for me. It
targets the quads exactly 200 kg
stiletto squat for two reps. That's a
little bit up from where I tore my
quadriceps. So, I'm feeling good. I'm
feeling confident that my quad's going
to hold up when I do a low bar squat.
So, now you're going to watch me warm up
to my top set of low bar squats. Let's
go.
I'll show you what a walk in the path
looks like.
You ready? Something wrong happens. Zero
reaction, please and thank you. And let
me do my thing. Ready?
Okay, let's go.
Come on. Come on. Come on.
[Applause]
Baby sleep.
All
right.
That was very comfortable. Uh anyway, so
let's talk about buttwink. Here are a
few of the tips that I have to help you
avoid buttwink. Firstly, you have to
understand buttwink happens at full
depth. What we want to do is squat as
deep as our mobility allows. So what
does that mean? That means up until we
go into buttwink, that's when we're too
deep. So no buttwink, neutral spine, but
the moment we get into that buttwink,
that means we're beyond what our
mobility allows. So that means going to
squat as deep as you can while still
maintaining a neutral position. But the
fact is in a powerlifting competition,
they don't care about buttwink or your
posture or structure, whatever. They
care about a standard, which is the
crease of the hip must be below the top
of the knee. And if you're not, then
your squat is not counted because it's
too high. Therefore, if you're in a
powerlifting competition, you need to
learn how to achieve that depth without
hurting yourself and while still being
able to lift the heaviest weight
possible. So, the first things are how
to brace correctly. Bracing is about
contracting those abdominal muscles.
Breath hold contributes to that as well.
But one of the biggest things that
people do that's a big error with
buttwink that causes buttwink is they
anterly rotate their pelvis to force so
that they don't go into buttwink. So
they push extra hard in this direction.
However, they're doing themselves a
disservice. I'll tell you why. Because
what happens is the hip joint which is
the thigh bone which is the femur sits
inside the socket. So it's a ball and
socket joint sits inside the pelvis. And
right now here that's 0 degrees of hip
extension or hip flexion I should say.
And we have a certain amount of degrees
of hip flexion available to us before we
hit the end range of motion. That's
structure on structure. And then to go
deeper than that, the pelvis needs to
come with it. And that's exactly what
happens. So if you start, so this is
neutral pelvis and zero degrees of hip
flexion. Now, if I go anterly rotate my
pelvis, that's kind of like if the feur
stays straight down and you're arching
your tail this way. So that means you've
taken up a few valuable degrees of hip
joint flexion just by standing straight
and arching your tail. A great test to
see this is lean up against the wall and
flex your hip. See how much range of
motion you get. Now arch your tail and
flex your hip and see that the range of
motion is less. Go neutral and flex the
hip. My knee can come up higher. That's
because I have a neutral pelvis
position. So that's the start point is
figuring out where the neutral pelvis
is. So if you're arching to begin with,
that's going to force you to boom go
into buttwink at the bottom. So there's
tip number one is start with the pelvis
in the correct position. Now I'm going
to talk about how to brace in
combination with that pelvis position.
So think about the core. There's so many
different muscles around the core, but a
lot of people really think about the
six-pack muscles. So let's talk about
the six-pack muscles. They're the rectus
abdominis. They attach from the bottom
of the rib cage to the front of the
pelvis here. They come all the way down.
Now, what a muscle does is it grabs
origin and insertion and it pulls those
two points together when they contract.
So, when you're trying to arch your tail
like this, you're stretching those
muscles. You're not contracting those
muscles. So, think about what does it
feel like to contract those muscles.
What I like to say is imagine someone's
going to punch you in the guts and you
need to contract those muscles to
protect yourself. How do you do it? Do
you stretch it like this? No. because if
you do that's going to hurt. You
contract which is where you bring your
rib cage towards your pelvis. So this is
where you hear the cue ribs down. So
when you arch your tail that's often
paired with flared ribs. So the two cues
that go hand in hand is ribs down and
piss up a wall. Pissing up a wall is
posteriorly rotating your pelvis to the
neutral position. So that's the most
important part about the brace to
prepare yourself for a squat to allow
for maximum range of motion without
going into buttwing. The next thing we
need to think about with our stance is
everybody's stance is going to be
slightly different. And that depends not
so much on your bone length, but rather
your hip joint structure. So what I mean
by that is everybody has different shape
feur. So that's the head of the femur,
which is the ball, as well as how deep
that socket is. So if you've got a very
shallow socket, you get a lot of
movement. If you've got a very deep hip
socket, then you've got more stability
but much less mobility, so less
movement. So therefore, if you have
shallow hip sockets and a lot of great
mobility, you probably be able to stand
with a really wide stance and squat
really deep and you have no problem. But
if you don't have that hip structure,
that's typically where you really need
to be figuring out the optimal depth for
you. Now, some people's hip shapes
prefer that they squat with a narrow
stance, which I've got athletes that
prefer this stance, but a lot of people,
I like to say a general start point is
feet just outside of hip width, toes
pointed very slightly outwards. Now, for
me, I'm a little bit wider than that. If
you notice, my my squat stance is
probably around here. Now, the reason I
do that is because the cue that I give
is to stand wide enough to allow room
for your pelvis to achieve that bottom
position and remain neutral. Okay? So
have a look here. So this is what I
consider to be roughly my comfortable
stance. And I'm bracing. Bang. And I'm
holding that brace
and coming down as deep as my mobility
allows. That's me attempting to not butt
wink. Maybe there's a little bit of
buttwink. But when I brace with the
barbell on my back, it's a little bit
better. But think about that. Okay. So
this is me trying to be as neutral as
possible and avoid buttwink. Now when I
bring my stance in closer. So I'm
standing right here now. So have a look
at the difference because I'm not giving
my pelvis room to achieve that bottom
position.
I feel like I can't really achieve that
same depth unless I really round my
back. So standing a little bit wider is
where I figured out is the best position
for me to be able to achieve that bottom
position and not buttw. The next thing
you need to think about with that stance
is most people, not all people, get more
range of motion in hip joint flexion
when we have some abduction. So that's
abduction. So that's abduct, that's
adductu. So that's abduction with with
our hip joint. Abduction combined with
flexion. So is this. So that's open hip
position. Or a cue that you might hear
me use a lot is knees out. So if my
knees come in, I'm minimizing the amount
of hip joint flexion I have access to.
When I point my toes out and allow my
knees to come out, that that's called
hip joint flexion and abduction. And
that gives me more range of motion. So
there's two very important parts of
avoiding buttwink. One being brace, two
being stance, I should say three, is
understanding how to keep your hips open
and move into that bottom position. Now,
I'm going to show you one more tool that
you can use that's going to allow a
deeper squat and avoid buttwink
footwear. So, have a look at my
footwear. These are my boxing shoes.
It's a relatively flat sold shoe. And I
like these when I'm doing a hip dominant
squat because the flat sold shoe allows
me to have more of a forward torso lean
and and push my hips back so that I can
use my hips a little bit more. So, have
a look at the range of motion that I get
with flats.
Now, this is the alternative to a flat
sold shoe. They are a weightlifting
shoe. So, there's lots of different
brands. These ones are Nike. They're
pretty good. I don't really care. I like
Adidas as well. Uh, but there's lots of
other great brands. But what this is is
a built-in heel that's about 3/4 of an
inch now, without having to put those
on. And not everyone wants to buy a pair
of shoes. I recommend you do if you are
into squatting, but an alternative to
that is just elevating your heels with a
weight plate. So have a look at how I
squat without the weight plate with flat
sold shoes.
Now
elevating my heels, doing the exact same
thing
allows me to achieve a little bit more
depth and maintain that neutral posture.
So that means that if you want to avoid
buttwink and you can't achieve that
bottom position without a flat sold
shoe, if you're doing a low bar squat
like in powerlifting, that's when I
would recommend an elevated heel shoe,
like a weightlifting shoe. Um,
alternatively, if you have a look at the
warm-up exercise that I did, it was the
stiletto squat, which is an even thicker
heel. Look how exaggerated that is. So
these ones here are about an inch, which
is pretty similar to what the
weightlifting shoe is. But have a look
at this, which is what I'm doing my
stiletto squats with. This allows way
more depth. The more the heel elevates,
the more it allows your knee to travel
forward, which increases the range of
motion available so that you can achieve
a deeper position and maintain a neutral
pelvis angle. So that's my take on how
to avoid buttwink. So now let's recap
the three tips to avoid buttwink.
Starting with the brace, that is
starting with a neutral pelvis position
and putting your ribs down. So, piss up
a wall and ribs down so that you can
think about contracting your abs as if
you're getting punched in the belly.
That's how you position your pelvis in
the optimal position for maximum range
of motion and hip joint flexion. Tip
two, stance width. If you don't know
your stance, it's about trial and error.
I like to teach people to start with
your toes just outside of hip width,
toes pointed very slightly outwards.
From here, open your hips and sit into
that bottom position. Wherever you feel,
make the adjustments wherever you feel
most comfortable. For me with a flat
sold shoe, this is where I get the most
comfort and the most range of motion in
my squat. So, you need to stand in a
stance that's comfortable for you. And
then last but not least, this is the
easiest fix that you can use for anybody
to improve their mobility and their
range of motion in their squat. If you
don't have an elevated heel
weightlifting shoe, you can use a
weightlifting plate and adjust the
thickness of the plate to pair with your
mobility to allow for as deep as
possible without buttwink. That's all.
Now you know my three tips for avoiding
buttwink. Click like, subscribe, all
that stuff. And I'll see you guys next
time.